= Rack::GridFS

Rack:GridFS is a Rack middleware for creating HTTP endpoints for files
stored in MongoDB's GridFS.  You can configure a prefix string which
will be used to match the path of a request, and further look up GridFS
files based on either their +ObjectId+ or +filename+ field.

For example,

  GET '/gridfs/someobjectid'

If the prefix is "gridfs", then the id will be be "someobjectid".

You can also use Rack::GridFS::Endpoint as a rack endpoint if you want to
handle routing another way

== Mongo Driver Compatibility Notes

This version is currently based on mongo-1.2+. As there were significant changes
to the GridFS API prior to v1.0, you may have luck with the git-tagged version
0.2.0 of this library with earlier versions of the driver.

== Installation

  gem install rack-gridfs

== Features
- Use as rack middleware or mount as a rack endpoint
- File lookup using a path or object id
- Chunked transfer encoding, keeps memory usage low
- Content-Type header set using 'mime-types' gem
- Last-Modified and Etag headers set automatically for conditional get support
- Cache-Control header support
- High availability when using replication sets

== Usage

  require 'rack/gridfs'
  use Rack::GridFS, :prefix => 'gridfs', :hostname => 'localhost', :port => 27017, :database => 'test'

Options:
- +prefix+: a string used to match against incoming paths and route to through
  the middleware.  Default 'gridfs'.
- +lookup+: whether to look up a file based on <tt>:id</tt> or <tt>:path</tt>
  (example below).  Default is <tt>:id</tt>.

You must also specify MongoDB database details:
- +hostname+: the hostname/IP where the MongoDB server is running.  Default 'localhost'.
- +port+: the port of the MongoDB server.  Default 27017.
- +database+: the name of the MongoDB database to connect to.
- +username+ and +password+: if you need to authenticate to MongoDB.

Alternatively you can pass in a <tt>Mongo::DB</tt> instance instead:
- +db+: MongoMapper.database, or Mongoid.database for example.

=== Simple Sinatra Example

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'sinatra'

  require 'rack/gridfs'
  use Rack::GridFS, :database => 'test', :prefix => 'gridfs'

  get /.*/ do
    "The URL did not match a file in GridFS."
  end

=== Usage with Rails 2

To use <tt>Rack::GridFS</tt> in a Rails application, add it as middleware in
<tt>application.rb</tt> or <tt>config/environments/*</tt>with something like this:

  config.middleware.insert_after Rack::Runtime, Rack::GridFS,
    :prefix => 'uploads', :database => "my_app_#{Rails.env}"

Run <tt>rake middleware</tt> to decide for yourself where to best place it in
the middleware stack for your app using {the Rails convenience methods}[http://guides.rubyonrails.org/rails_on_rack.html#configuring-middleware-stack],
taking into consideration that it can probably be near the top since it simply
returns a "static" file or a 404.

=== Usage with Rails 3

To use in Rails 3, you can insert into the middleware stack as above, or mount
the app directly in your routes (recommended). In <tt>config/routes.rb</tt>:

  mount Rack::GridFS::Endpoint.new(:db => Mongoid.database), :at => "gridfs"

This allows for much more straightforward and sensible configuration, if you do
not require other middleware in front of GridFS (Rack-based authorization, for
instance).

=== Path (filename) Lookup

The <tt>:lookup => :path</tt> option causes files to be looked up from the GridFS
store based on their +filename+ field (which can be a full file path) rather than
+ObjectId+ (requests still need to match the +prefix+ you've set). This allows
you to find files based on essentially arbitrary URLs such as:

    GET '/prefix/media/images/jane_avatar.jpg'

How filenames are set is specific to your application. We'll look at an example
with Carrierwave below.

*NOTE*: The Mongo Ruby driver will try to create an index on the +filename+
field for you automatically, but if you are using filename lookup you'll want to
double-check that it is created appropriately (on slaves only if you have a
master-slave architecture, etc.).

=== Carrierwave Example

Path lookup works well for usage with Carrierwave[https://github.com/jnicklas/carrierwave].
As a minimal example with Mongoid:

  # config/initializers/carrierwave.rb
  CarrierWave.configure do |config|
    config.storage = :grid_fs
    config.grid_fs_connection = Mongoid.database
    config.grid_fs_access_url = "/uploads"
  end

  # app/uploaders/avatar_uploader.rb
  class AvatarUploader < CarrierWave::Uploader::Base
    # (Virtual) path where uploaded files will be stored, appended to the
    # gridfs_access_url by methods used with view helpers
    def store_dir
      "#{model.class.to_s.underscore}/#{mounted_as}/#{model.id}"
    end
  end

  # app/models/user.rb
  class User
    include Mongoid::Document
    mount_uploader :avatar, AvatarUploader
  end

  # app/views/user/show.html.erb
  <%= image_tag(@user.avatar.url) if @user.avatar? %>

This will result in URL paths like <tt>/uploads/user/avatar/4d250d04a8f41c0a31000006/original_filename.jpg</tt>
being generated for the view helpers, and Carrierwave will store
<tt>user/avatar/4d250d04a8f41c0a31000006/original_filename.jpg</tt> as the
+filename+ in GridFS. Thus, you can configure <tt>Rack::GridFS</tt> to serve
these files as such:

  config.middleware.insert_after Rack::Runtime, Rack::GridFS,
    :prefix => 'uploads', :lookup => :path, :database => "my_app_#{Rails.env}"

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010-2011 Blake Carlson. See LICENSE for details.
